[THEME MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Welcome
to "Beyond Belief."
In this edition of
"Beyond Belief,"
we're going to be talking about
something that will affect
all of us, life after death.
And how many of us have
been skeptics, nonbelievers,
thinking when you
die that is it?
Our special guest on "Beyond
Belief", too, was a skeptic,
but things changed for him.
Things changed dramatically
with his after death experience.
>>FEMALE VOICEOVER: He
says he has glimpsed
the divine, an orb of light
brighter than a million suns,
all powerful, all loving,
a being beyond words.
Dr. Eben Alexander recounts
his remarkable near-death
experience in the New York Times
bestseller "Proof of Heaven:
A Neurosurgeon's Journey
Into the Afterlife."
In 2008, Alexander suffered
a meningitis induced coma
and nearly died.
The out-of-body experience
he had in that state
is proof that consciousness
is independent of the body.
Alexander continues
to probe consciousness
and looks to transcend the
limitations of the brain
in his latest book,
"The Map of Heaven:
How Science, Religion,
and Ordinary People
are Proving the Afterlife."
>>NOORY: Now that's pretty
fascinating so welcome
to "Beyond Belief"
Dr. Eben Alexander.
What a should I say
life you've had?
>>EBEN ALEXANDER: It's been
quite a life, especially when
you realize as I often say
no one gets out of here dead.
That's really the
truth of the matter.
>>NOORY: Eben, tell me a
little bit about the skepticism
that you had prior
to these episodes.
>>ALEXANDER: Well I had
grown up in a family
with my father having
a tremendous influence
on my life.
He was the head of a
neurosurgical training program,
very scientific.
He also had a very
strong faith in God.
For him there was
never any doubt.
When he operated on a patient
and the patient did well,
it was really God's work.
I grew up in the '60s and
'70s, and like many others
in that generation I
always knew that science
is the pathway to truth.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>ALEXANDER: And I
had wanted to believe
what I heard in church
growing up in a Methodist
Church in North Carolina, but
20 years spent in neurosurgery
I just wasn't sure how a
conscious awareness could
survive the death of
the brain and body.
And of course, that's why my
experience, which happened back
in November 2008,
shifted everything.
Because in fact,
such a severe case
of gram negative
bacterial meningitis
should have disabled all but
the most rudimentary aspects
of consciousness, and
yet my consciousness
was greatly enhanced
during the experience when
the human part of my
brain, the neocortex,
was being devastated.
And that completely
violated everything
I had learned in neuroscience
about consciousness
in the brain and it
really has come to show me
that the material is wrong.
And in fact, it's parallel to
a lot of what's happening today
in the notion of philosophy
of mind and understanding
of consciousness that
makes much more sense.
And that's what "Proof of
Heaven" and "Map of Heaven"
are all about.
>>NOORY: Back in St.
Louis, the county executive
at the time, Buzz Westfall,
came down with meningitis
and they put him
in an induced coma
while they were trying
to get him well again
and he just never
came out of it.
It was a horrible situation
and I've always wondered,
Eben, that when you're in
that state of unconsciousness,
is the mind really still moving?
Are you dreaming?
What's going on at that
point and what is he
seeing when that's going on?
>>ALEXANDER: Well, I think
that the interesting thing is
when you finally
begin to understand,
as much of our current science
is coming to understand,
that the physical brain is
not creating consciousness out
of physical matter but there is
something much more perplexing
going on.
Whereas, in fact, the
brain should better
be viewed as a reducing
valve or filter.
It's interesting, but
we're conscious in spite
of our brain.
Te neocortex, I
believe, is the part
that actually handles a lot
of that filtering mechanism.
But consciousness is
something that's allowed in.
Consciousness from my point
of view is primordial.
Consciousness preexists
the entire universe,
and in fact all of
the material universe
is built on the substrate of
consciousness is fundamental.
And that's why the
current revolution
in kind of brain science
and the mind-body discussion
is so interesting and of
so much power to all of us
because it's showing us what
quantum mechanics has tried
to show us for 100 years,
which is consciousness
is fundamental in everything
that evolves in this universe.
>>NOORY: We've had arguments
on "Coast to Coast,"
my radio show, with scientists
about that very question, that
without the brain does
consciousness still exist?
And some hard
scientists will say, no,
you've got to have the
physical brain in order
to make this happen.
But I agree with you.
I think that it exists
outside of the physical realm,
doesn't it?
>>ALEXANDER: Right, exactly.
And this is something
that we can come to see,
especially those who are
with patients who die.
That's where the real action is.
If you want to find
out what's going on,
talk to hospice
nurses, nurses in ICUs,
things like that because they
got this a long time ago.
They see enough evidence
when a patient passes over
that it's not simply
the end of everything
when a physical body
dies, but it's actually
a release of the soul.
And in fact, what I would say
is that conscious awareness
is greatly enhanced
when it's freed up
from the shackles of the
physical brain, completely
outside of space and time.
It's a much richer,
more profound existence.
And yet the interesting
thing is that when
we come into these bodies,
because I believe that it all
has to do with reincarnation, we
don't just have one incarnation
and then it's heaven
or hell forever
and that's the end of it.
But in fact, we come
back again and again
in our process of ascendance.
But the interesting
thing is how we forget.
There is that forgetting.
Now children, I think, are very
much walking in two worlds.
Very young children, they're
living in that spiritual realm
and in this earthly realm.
>>NOORY: They seem to remember
a little better than we do.
>>ALEXANDER: They remember.
And it's amazing to see.
And if you're open
to that, you start
to realize that in infants
and young children,
that they are seeing these
other aspects, other beings.
And it's something that
our culture unfortunately
kind of drills out of us.
And that's to the detriment
of Western culture
because other
cultures, of course,
have maintained that
knowledge of a continuity
and the eternity of soul.
But our Western
culture, especially
under the yoke of
scientific materialism,
has lost that sense of
the nature of reality.
>>NOORY: Eben, tell us a little
bit about this experience that
happened to you, the
moment you got sick
and then what happened when
you finally came out of it?
>>ALEXANDER: Well, it's
important to point out
that my near-death
experience, although it
has many of the
hallmarks of other kind
of deep transcendental
in the East,
it has one fairly
atypical feature and that
is that I was amnesic for
the life of Eben Alexander
in the midst of it all.
And that all served
a major purpose.
It took me months and even
years to really appreciate.
But in essence, it
all started in what
I call the earthworm-eye view,
a very primitive, coarse,
unresponsive realm, like being
in dirty Jell-O with roots
or blood vessels all around me.
And that seemed to go
on for a very long time.
Now, when I first came back to
this world and wrote it all up,
I thought that that
earthworm-eye view,
as I called it, was simply
the best consciousness
my physical brain
could muster when
the neocortex was
being destroyed
by bacterial meningitis.
The good news is that
didn't last forever.
I was rescued by a slowly
spinning, very clear
white light with fine
gold and silver tendrils
coming off of it and it had
a perfect musical melody.
And as it came towards
me, slowly spinning,
it opened up like
a rip in the fabric
of that ugly earthworm-eye
view, the coarse realm,
and led up into this
brilliant ultra real valley,
what I call the Gateway Valley.
Now, its Gateway because it
was only kind of the entry
point to multiple levels going
all the way out to the core.
But that I believe,
that Gateway Valley,
is the same realm that I
believe all spiritually
journeyers as into the spiritual
realm over thousands of years
have encountered
that same thing.
And it's often put
together and then
we come back with some
of our prior beliefs
and our personal mindset
kind of shaping it.
And our words and
language reflect that.
But in fact, when you read
many of these accounts,
thousands of these
accounts, what stands out
are the similarities.
Now, in my particular
case, that Gateway Valley,
I was a speck of awareness
on a butterfly wing.
There were millions
of other butterflies
and they were flying in
these looping spirals
and they were of colors
beyond the rainbow.
>>NOORY: It's like
being in a kaleidoscope.
>>ALEXANDER: It was very
much like a kaleidoscope.
And then flying down
into that lush greenery.
This valley was absolutely
fertile, rich, lush
with life and creation.
No sign of any death or decay.
And going into that, I remember
sensing the flowers, buds,
blossoms on trees.
Everything was always opening
dynamic, creative, blooming,
every bit of it.
And down below in this
belly were thousands
of what I call in my
early writings villagers,
they were souls between lives.
Lots of joy and dancing,
merriment, children playing,
dogs jumping.
I mean incredible
festivities and it was all
being driven because
up above were
these golden orbs
of light swooping,
leaving sparkling trails against
that blue-black velvety sky.
And all the scene lit by these
billowing clouds of color.
And in fact, the best part
about it was I wasn't alone.
In everything I
witnessed in that realm
there was a partner
on that butterfly wing
who I came to call my guardian
angel, a beautiful woman.
And I'll never forget
how she looked at me,
how she was sitting,
how she was dressed--
the same kind of
peasant garb as--
>>NOORY: Did they have wings?
>>ALEXANDER: No, she
didn't have wings
but she was sitting
there with me.
We were sitting on
what I interpreted
as butterfly wings or a
magic carpet or whatever,
but something like that.
But she was just sitting
there looking as angelic
as could be, but no wings.
And her message to me, I
believe is such a central part
of the message from
the book, "Proof
of Heaven" to this world
of my story, which is you
are deeply loved and
cherished forever.
You will be taken care of.
You have nothing to fear.
And those are the most
fundamentally important lessons
of the journey.
And I remember the soft
breeze that blew through
that in my early writings
I called the breath of God
or divine wind.
And that was my first knowing.
Remember, I was
completely amnesic
for anything of Eben Alexander's
life-- no words, no language,
no religious concepts,
none of that.
So that soft breeze was my
first awareness of the divine
and of the infinite loving power
of the divine through every bit
of this, the lower
four-dimensional space-time
realms, this
Gateway Valley which
actually had a completely
different temporal flow
and causality.
And all of that going on.
What happened next
was once again,
the angelic choirs, the
music, sound, vibration
provided yet another portal up
into higher and higher levels.
And I remember going
through several levels
of spatial and
temporal dimensions
until I got out to
what I call the core.
The core, infinite, inky
blackness, but filled
to overflowing with
that infinite healing
power of unconditional love of
the creator for the creation.
>>NOORY: This just
illuminated you.
>>ALEXANDER: It absolutely did.
Illumination is a
beautiful word to use
because in fact, the
paradox of that core realm,
of that oneness, it's
kind of like the event
horizon of a black hole where
you're right arm the very edge
and going into that
oneness there is nothing
but the infinite oneness, all
of eternity, all of infinity,
the core driver of all that is.
But at that event
horizon, you can
start to sense how it
all gets parceled out
into the incredible theater
of drama of sentient beings
throughout this universe
that are living these lives,
discovering these lessons,
teaching these lessons.
And you end up seeing how this
is all really soul school.
But the most fundamental
lessons, of course,
have to do with that
unconditional love
and coming to realize that
unconditional love has
infinite power to
heal at all levels,
whether you're talking about
the individual soul, the soul
group, nations, all of
humanity, all on life on Earth,
all the sentient civilizations
throughout the universe.
That love has infinite
power to heal.
>>NOORY: We're with
Dr. Eben Alexander,
author of "Proof of Heaven"
and "Map of Heaven."
And he experienced something
just truly remarkable.
Now, we went out on the streets
to talk to people about life
after death, Eben.
I want you to take a look with
me at some of their comments.
OK.
Here we go.
>>WOMAN: I don't
really think so.
>>WOMAN: I believe
in heaven, so yes.
>>MAN: It's not really
clear what it may be,
but I believe in some
sort of life after death.
>>MAN: I am not certain
about the afterlife.
I don't know.
>>MAN: I think we split into
a million little souls, kind
of like sand on
the beach, and then
it kind of collect
in the rocks, which
is like the incarnation
of our being.
>>WOMAN: I believe what you do
during your life affects what
you become in your afterlife.
But it's your physical
body that dies
and your soul lives on forever.
>>NOORY: Well, Dr.
Alexander, what we just
saw seemed to be a mixed
review of whether there
is life after death.
Why do you think so many
people aren't in that position
that you're in and I've
been in in terms of a belief
that there is life after death?
You had a lot of people there
that just weren't quite sure.
>>ALEXANDER: Well, I think
it's in large measure
due to our culture.
And we look at the scientists
as the arbiters of truth.
Scientists have largely
told us that the material
world is what is real, that's
what we're here to study.
The most fundamental field
in science in many ways
is physics.
And of course physics has
built in that assumption
that the only stuff
that is in this universe
is the physical world.
And that's part of the
problem, because in fact,
what I would say is my journey
showed me very clearly--
and this is where I see the
whole scientific world going--
that we live in a
spiritual universe.
From the very top
down, bottom up,
however you want
to look at this,
we are in a spiritual
universe that
is absolutely alive with the
spiritual nature of who we are
and what we're here to do
and what this is all about.
The material world is actually
just the stage setting,
it's the backdrop.
It's like the facade
and in a Western.
When Hollywood goes
out to shoot a Western
you've got all the fronts
of the buildings there
that makes it look
like that old town.
That's what the
physical reality is.
But in fact, what's
really going on
is a drama that has
everything to do
with sentient beings being
here to learn and teach
these lessons and the ascendance
and evolution of consciousness.
That's what's really happening.
So focus on physics
in the material world
is really just focus
on the stage setting.
But each and every one of us are
truly eternal spiritual beings
and I think that's the
most important lesson.
And our whole culture
will shift dramatically
as we come to incorporate this.
And it's really being forced on
us by the truth, by the facts.
Because if you try to subscribe
to pure scientific materialism
or physicalism, that the
physical is all that exists,
you end up running
into major problems.
One of the biggest
problems, of course,
is the measurement problem
in quantum mechanics, which
the physics community
has struggled
with for more than 100 years.
And the way out of that
issue is through realizing
that we are spiritual
beings, that consciousness
is fundamental at driving
this entire universe.
And yet our physicists,
some of them,
have a little difficulty
letting go of the simplicity
of pure physicalism.
>>NOORY: Well, I'm
impressed that you've
taken a scientific look
at what happened to you
and you're coming up
with those answers
that those people
who have been very
spiritual since the beginning
of time have always told us,
and that is there is life
after death and it's out there.
Now, during this
experience that you had,
and it seemed to be
illuminating as we talked about
and enlightening and
wholesome and heavenly,
but did you have any
glimpse of what could
have been conceived as hell?
>>ALEXANDER: Well,
I would say if I
had gone into my
experience and just
been through that
earthworm-eye view
and come back to
this world, I would
have had a hellish NDE, very
simple and straightforward.
And you know the thing
is I cycled many a time.
I would go up, sound
vibrational frequency always
offering the
portal, the gateway,
and I think that's an important
point because, of course,
we used sound in
chants, in the resonance
of ancient structures,
et cetera to drive
spiritual journeys forever.
And so sound was a
crucial part of it.
But I came to
realize that this was
very much a spiritual
journey that had no one
no other explanation.
I'm sorry.
>>NOORY: Well, I assume
in your human life
you were a pretty decent
guy, you were a good person.
If you weren't, would
that hellish experience
have been more magnified?
>>ALEXANDER: Well,
I think that's
the other important
point is life review.
Your life flashes
before your eyes.
It's not a new age
concept, it just
has come up in the
last few decades
of near-death experiences
because in fact,
near-death experiences
go back thousands
of years across all cultures.
And the life review is a
crucial thing to understand.
I mean the near-death
experience of Er,
the Armenian soldier
reported by Plato, here's
a soldier way back
2,300 years ago
who came back to life after
a near-death experience
and his message was,
when you go there,
what happens is you review your
whole life and the only thing
that is important, as he
put it, is the love that you
have manifested.
So what I came to
see in my journey
is very clearly that
that unconditional love
is the straightest path of
ascendance towards oneness
with the divine.
And we each have that free
will to make the choices
in our lives of love,
compassion, forgiveness,
acceptance, mercy, or otherwise.
And that's why I said
in "Proof of Heaven,"
you can do no wrong.
But when I say do no
wrong, what that really
means is be willing to
face the consequences,
to reap what you sow.
That life review
would look like hell
to anyone who has spent
much of their life
dishing out pain and
suffering to others,
has been greedy and selfish,
egocentric, fully self-focused.
That's a guaranteed recipe for
a pretty hellish life review
that then tends rectify
and kind of get you
going in the right direction.
And remember that
in that life review
the judgement is from our
higher soul and soul mates.
It's not from some higher
being, although when
you've been to the
core, to the one realm,
what you realize is all
of consciousness is one.
We are all part of
that one consciousness
and that one universal
consciousness
is what is driving all of this
evolution of consciousness.
But there is no need
for an eternal hell.
>>NOORY: When you
came back, we'll
put it like that,
did it change you?
>>ALEXANDER: Everything changed.
Now, first of all, important
to point out my doctors
were right.
My meningitis was so severe
and had destroyed my neocortex
so effectively that when
I first started to wake up
in the ICU room, I had no
memory of Eben Alexander's life
before.
All I remembered was where
I had been in this journey
and it had happened
over seven Earth days
because that's how
long my coma was.
But if you had asked me then,
how long did all of this last?
Months, years, I don't know.
It was a very extensive
odyssey that I was on.
And I think that's a very
crucial thing to understand.
My brain was wrecked, but I
didn't even recognize my loved
ones at the bedside.
>>NOORY: How did
you contract this?
>>ALEXANDER: We never found out.
In "Proof of Heaven"
I talk a little bit
about some very
interesting facets
because I had recently been to
Israel a few months earlier.
>>NOORY: And you were fine?
>>ALEXANDER: And I was fine.
I was fine.
So we never figured out
how I contracted it.
It was a deep mystery.
It was a one in 10
million diagnosis,
having E. coli
meningitis in an adult.
That almost always
happens in newborns.
>>NOORY: Something you ate?
>>ALEXANDER: Well, no.
We just never figured it out.
All I can say is I'm very
blessed to have this recovery.
It was a tremendous
gift, in fact,
because that kind of
destruction of the neocortex
blew away all the simplistic
little pseudo explanations
that modern science or
medicine would try and slap
on to my experience.
And yet, there is
no way to explain
that kind of rich,
ultra real experience
that I had in the Gateway
Valley and the core,
given our general ideas that the
brain produces consciousness.
It's impossible.
You have to turn it
around and look at it
the other way around,
which of course applies
so well to so many other
near-death experiences, too.
>>NOORY: I envy your
experience, but I
don't envy what you had to
go through to get there.
>>ALEXANDER: Well,
the good news is I try
and go back there all the time.
And what I often
tell people is you
don't have to die or almost
die to come to see everything
that I know about this.
I meditate an hour or two a day.
This is why I do that work
with sacred acoustics,
to try and help
people get the tools.
Because all you need to
do is be a sentient being.
If you're conscious, you
can go within consciousness.
Once you realize the brain
does not create consciousness,
but that consciousness
creates all of this world,
then you start to realize that
slipping beyond the veil that
is created by the
physical brain and getting
into that universal and
infinite consciousness
might offer up some real wisdom.
So that is why I encourage
people to meditate.
Take 20 minutes, an hour,
two hours a day if you can.
That's what I try to go.
Go inside.
Realize that that voice in
the head is not consciousness.
Your consciousness
is aware, it's
the observer of
that voice, but we
are all far grander than
simply that one little voice
in the head.
We are the observer of that.
In fact, all of that
is interconnected
and that's why that work
with sacred acoustics I think
is so important to help get
these tools out to the world.
>>NOORY: Did you get
close to the point
where you thought
you may have met God?
>>ALEXANDER: I would say I
not only met but became one
with God.
That is what happens in that
core realm, in that oneness.
Now, the problem is
when you say that kind
of thing in this world, people
want to lock you up or put
your medication, give you
some Prozac or something
and try and calm you down.
But the fact of the matter
is the way I see it now,
our consciousness is an
absolute and direct link
to that creative deity,
to that infinite oneness.
And we can all
come to know that.
And obviously, you leave
ego far, far behind
in this whole thing.
The boundaries of self
are false and that
is what this is all about
is coming to a deeper
wisdom of what
consciousness truly is
and coming to see that
we are all connected,
not just with other human beings
but with all sentient life
throughout the universe and
with everything in our world,
all other animals.
It's all about
that consciousness
and we're all manifestations
of that consciousness.
Humans are not the
pinnacle of anything,
as much as we try to put
ourselves up on that pedestal.
I've found that the only thing
that humans do that makes
them special is they cook.
But it's not about the
language, it's really not.
Our language actually
is an impediment.
Kind of the rational
mind, the voice
in the head so
tightly tied to ego
gets in the way of this kind
of journey and understanding.
But through deep
meditation, releasing
those false boundaries
of self and the ego
and all of its little
fears and concerns
we can actually come
to much greater wisdom.
>>NOORY: OK.
Let's find out what
some of you have
to say about consciousness.
>>MAN: Consciousness it is
a daily question, right?
We don't really know.
>>WOMAN: I kind of think
collective consciousness,
like raising awareness and
everybody kind of becoming
more attuned to one another.
>>WOMAN: Being able to talk
with and experience life
with other people
knowing that you're awake
and having thoughts and
feelings that are different
from other people.
>>MAN: Joseph
Campbell describes it
as being like a leaf
turning towards the sun,
and I think that's an apt way.
That's what I think
consciousness is.
>>MAN: We all have heavy
dreams that seem real,
so who's to say that's
different than this life
that we're living every day?
It's something I
question all the time.
>>NOORY: That was fascinating
watching people like that.
But we get people that
right, they write in to you
at info@ebenalexander.com.
I want to read a couple
of them to you, Eben,
and have you answer them for us.
Jane from Nashville, Tennessee.
She said, Eben,
I read your book,
which is way above my thinking.
In your book about
heaven, if you were there
you didn't mention Jesus
or saints or disciples.
Would you be so
kind as to tell me
what church you
attend and do you
believe in having communion?
>>ALEXANDER: Well, I grew
up in a Methodist church
and what I would
say is my journey
showed me very clearly that
God that I met on my journey
and have come to know so
much more through meditation
and centering prayer,
that God loves all.
That God loves Christians, Jews,
Muslims, Hindus, Buddhists,
atheists, skeptics, bloggers.
That God loves all of creation.
And one of the worst
problems we've had,
I came to see that all the
deep mystical traditions of all
the great faiths-- whether
it's Buddhism, Judaism,
Christian mysticism, Sufism,
Islam mysticism, what
have you-- they all converge
on one knowing and one reality.
It's only when we get the
dogma that emerges out
of the teachings for
the masses that come out
of the various religious systems
that we start to run into all
of this incredible conflict.
And this sense of
oh, I'm right, you're
wrong is completely wrong.
The deeper traditions
that bypass
the Tower of Babel
approach of our dialogue
and of our teachings is
what gets in the way.
This is why I encourage
people to go within.
Go within because the
deepest truth lies within
and there is great truth to
all of those great faiths.
But it's all about
the oneness and how
we are all part of one
consciousness that's
important to get.
And any kind of
preaching of separatism
is really getting away
from the original messages
of the prophets.
So in fact, I would say that I
encourage all of these faiths
as long as they are
about the oneness
and of compassion
and of forgiveness
and of the reality of that
spiritual essence that
is part of all of us.
>>NOORY: Peter from St. Louis
writes, Dr. Alexander, I
immensely enjoyed your books.
Very much raised my spirits.
I was wondering, though,
regarding Christian beliefs,
your NDE seems to
not indicate any
of what might typically
find with the afterlife
as described in the Bible.
Has that changed your views
or beliefs in Christianity?
So another--
>>ALEXANDER: I think it has.
And in fact, what
I would say about
that-- my amnesia,
as I mentioned,
was a very important feature.
Because when I first
came back to this world,
I had none of the
another language, none
of the preconceptions, none
of the religious concepts
to put it together.
And all of that came back
over about eight weeks,
but during that time
I was struggling
to record my experience.
And so to me that
was a real gold mine,
the fact that I was amnesic.
I had an empty slate so
I could go to that realm,
have this experience, come back
without any of the baggage that
may souls do have.
>>NOORY: Or bias.
>>ALEXANDER: Or bias.
And I think that was important.
It also is important to
point out that everything
that I have come
to know and learn
about this in all of my reading
and all of my meditation
is that, as I said, all of the
great faiths at their origin
are the same.
And in fact, what I came to see
is the original Christianity
that was taught by Christ, which
is not necessarily what's there
in the Bible because people need
to remember that the Bible was
actually constructed
by committees
several centuries later
and they intentionally
omitted several writings.
And for me, learning more
about the gnostic gospels,
about the Dead Sea
Scrolls has been
very important to
formulate what I
view as a much more
complete version
of the original Christianity.
So I don't necessarily
take the version
that came out of the
patriarchal committees and kind
of the Romans realizing that
Christianity was here to stay.
I don't think that their
viewpoint is quite as
valid as a more global
viewpoint of early Christianity
and the actual
teachings of Christ
that I think come through some
of the other writings that
were not included in
the New Testament.
Likewise, I would say
teachings of Buddha, Mohammad.
I see great overlap in
the love and compassion.
That's what really is
the deep message here,
but that message was
hijacked by others
who tried to twist it
into some of the systems
of the modern world.
>>NOORY: OK.
Let's go to our final
e-mail here, Eben, for you.
It's Bob from New York.
Dr. Alexander, within a day
I finished reading your book.
That's pretty good, by the way.
It has really
brought some clarity
to many of the
questions and helped
me regain some goodness
and wholeness in my life.
What do you believe
becomes of the evil people
that we see more of
ever today in our world?
What about them?
>>ALEXANDER: Well, I would say
they have a hellacious life
review to go through.
And one should not
minimize that at all.
And as I often say, you
don't need an eternal hell,
but a life review where
you have to make amends
for all the wrongs that you've
done not just in your actions,
but even in your thoughts is
the kind of corrective measure
that replaces that notion of
eternal hell and damnation.
To me that made zero sense when
I came back from my journey.
For one thing, I already could
see that reincarnation was
such a crucial part of this.
But I can also see that this
is a very just universe.
We reap what we sow and
that's a very crucial lesson.
In the Eastern
spiritual traditions,
they talk about karma.
And I came away from my journey
seeing very clearly that you're
going to end up learning
these lessons of love one
way or the other.
We might as well do it by
manifesting as much love
as we can in this
life, loving ourselves
because first and
foremost that's
I would say the origin of so
many of the world's problems
is we don't even love
ourselves enough.
And we have to do that
before we can really
love others and serve as
a conduit of that love
of the creator for the creation,
bring that love through us.
But that's what we're
here to do and the more
we can follow that in
this life, the better we
will do in that life review.
In fact, my life partner
in this, Karen Newell,
often talks about
doing a daily review
just to keep the baggage
of her life review
as kind of uncumbersome
as possible.
So live this every day.
That's why these lessons
are so important.
They're not just about
what happens when you die.
This is about how
to live this life
and it only comes from a
much richer understanding
of the spiritual
beings that we are
and that this is a
spiritual universe.
And that's what
this is all about.
>>NOORY: If you want to write
in email to Dr. Alexander,
it's info@ebenalexander.com
What do
you say to people who don't
believe in life after death?
>>ALEXANDER: I say this
is really tough luck.
Well, this is all a
question of free will.
And what God gives us
is a beautiful gift,
is free will to make the choice.
And we're supposed
to be doing this
and we're supposed
to be doubting.
To me, the greatest
asset in this journey
is a true open-minded skeptic.
I can tell you that what my
coma journey did to me early on
was made me a very
open-minded skeptic.
I had to doubt everything.
Just as Descartes said, if
you want to be a true seeker,
you have to at some
point in your life
doubt everything you've
ever thought was real
and start over
with an open mind.
And I often would say
early on, I'll believe it
all for now, just
for the time being,
because I want to try it on.
You have to try these things on.
Our culture is so good
at kind of hammering home
these kind of ideas
of materialism
that we can lose
sight of it all.
But, indeed, the answers
do lie within us all.
So I urge people to go within,
do that practice of meditation.
And as sentient beings, we all
have a very legitimate claim
to that realm.
But I do believe that
souls can get stuck.
If they have too
much doubt about it
they can get stuck at that kind
of life review phase, stuck
down in those murky realms
of that earthworm-eye view
and never really be able
to ascend because this
is all part of our learning
and teaching these lessons
and coming deeper
and closer to truth.
And that is the
truth, but it has
to do with our waking up
and facing that truth.
>>NOORY: Would you want to go
through this experience again,
or would you rather just wait
until the real time comes?
>>ALEXANDER: Well, I
believe that our lives are
a beautiful blend of kind of a
divine plan that has everything
to do with our
picking before we come
into these incarnations
our higher souls
and soul mates in the soul
group choose the hardships.
The tough things in life
are gifts-- illness, injury.
Before my coma, of course,
I looked at all that is bad.
Why do these bad things happen?
Well, in fact, look
at them as gifts
because that is what provides
the engine for the growth
of our soul and the ascendance.
It's how we face
the hardships, how
we face those injuries
and illnesses and all
the other challenges in life.
And if we can make choices
that manifest that love
and that compassion,
forgiveness, love
for ourselves and
for others, that's
what allows us to learn the
lessons of the hardships
and to ascend beyond them and to
realize that every step of this
is about soul school, being
here to learn and teach
these beautiful lessons.
And right now, the main
lesson for humanity to learn
is that lesson of
unconditional love.
>>NOORY: Are you
scared of dying, Eben?
>>ALEXANDER: Not a bit.
It's not the end.
It's actually an awakening.
But I have plenty to
do in this incarnation.
>>NOORY: Yeah, there's no rush.
>>ALEXANDER: We get
things done here.
We're here for a reason.
As much as I often point out
that the material world is
the illusion, what's
concrete rock solid real
is soul, spirit, consciousness.
That's real and we're here
to learn these lessons.
And that's why all of it is set
up in this beautiful fashion,
for us to come to
realize that and realize
that the brain,
as I said earlier,
is a reducing valve or filter.
It's a prison that our
true awareness comes
from going to the
other side of that veil
and we can do that
in meditation,
make it a daily practice,
centering prayer,
bring that love for yourself
in and that love for others.
Come to see the beauty
in the hardships, which
you can do in deep
meditation, and find
that there is great guidance
and wisdom and comfort
and love deep in meditation
and centering prayer.
>>NOORY: Has this
experience affected you
to the point where it was
very emotional for you
when you come out of it?
Because I would
think after you go
through an experience
like this, not only is it
an awakening, as
you've gone through,
but that it really tells you
something about the universe.
And when you're part of
that, when you understand it,
it's got to be a feeling that
it's almost indescribable.
>>ALEXANDER: Well, it is a
beautiful feeling, indeed.
I think the important
thing to point out
is the tremendous
amount of confusion
in our kind of conceptualization
of the nature of reality
and understanding
our place in it
has to do with those
false boundaries of self.
And it really involves
moving beyond that.
And that's why souls who
are very advanced, who
are far along in this
incarnation process
are the ones who have
completely been liberated
from that notion of
self and kind of the ego
and all of the fear and anxiety
that's built around that.
And the more we're
here to serve others
and to bring that
love in, the better
it serves us to kind
of have a deeper
sense of this whole universe.
Because anytime we feel
ourselves as separate from it,
we're obviously under
this great delusion
of our modern culture, which
tries to separate out self.
But in fact, by getting rid of
those false boundaries of self,
that's when we start to
realize that one mind
and that one consciousness
makes far more sense.
And that's something
we can certainly
get to deep in meditation.
>>NOORY: In a great movie
called "What Dreams May Come"
with the late Robin Williams,
and gosh I miss him,
it really showed a different
glimpse of what is out there.
When you look back at
what happened to you,
is it something you expected
or is it different than what
you expected?
>>ALEXANDER: Very different.
It was very, very different.
The alter reality of
that realm is stunning.
And you often hear about it.
And people ask me, well,
was it like high def TV?
No.
This is so much more than that.
And the thing to
realize is by getting
into that infinite
universal consciousness,
by transcending that veiling
function in the neocortex
and the shackles of
the physical brain,
we're getting into that
wide open territory.
People, for example, who have
taken psychedelic drugs have
a teeny glimpse of it because
what psychedelic drugs do
is they remove some of
that filtering mechanism
and they allow a full onslaught
of sensory information,
but not full.
>>NOORY: Maybe too full.
>>ALEXANDER: Yes.
And not only that,
though, they also
allow us to get in touch with
that universal consciousness
where you're actually lifted up
out of the illusion of the here
and now, of that false
sense of locality
that we have in these
physical bodies.
And so all of the
information is flowing at us
in tremendous
fashion, plus we're
becoming not only other beings
but other groups of beings,
other segments of the universe
as part of the lessons being
shown to us.
So it's no wonder that our
Earthly language, which
of course is very good for
describing a trip to Disney
World, is not quite
so well suited
to describing these kind
of spiritual journeys.
That's, again, why I
encourage people to go within.
The answers lie within us all.
But so much of it cannot
really be put into our Earthly
language.
>>NOORY: So doctor, how
is reincarnation possible?
>>ALEXANDER: Well,
reincarnation completely
defies the materialist thinking
that I had before my coma,
brain creates consciousness,
birth to death nothing more,
which is what I
believed before coma.
But I think what
you have to do is
gain a much grander view of
what consciousness actually is.
And there are scientific
groups around the world who are
doing some amazing work here.
But it really has to do
with this whole mind-body
discussion.
The mind-body debate has been
going on for 2,300 years.
You'd think we'd be getting
close to some answers.
Well, I believe we
finally are but it's
through a consolidation of the
greatest wisdom out of Eastern
and Western spiritual
traditions and the leading edges
of science and technology.
It has everything to do with
consciousness and what it is.
And when you come to
realize that consciousness
is what creates all this
universe and not the other way
around, then it starts
to make more sense.
And for me it was crucial
to see in my journey
I came back and knew
that reincarnation
was the way it all
worked, but I didn't
know how to incorporate that
into my scientific worldview.
It turns out that a lot
of the scientific homework
has been done.
One of the biggest
groups is the group
at the University of Virginia,
the Vision and Perceptual
Studies; the work
of Ian Stevenson
and now with Jim Tucker, where
they have more than 2,500 cases
of past life
memories in children
where the best explanation
is of true reincarnation.
Now, it turns out it also
answers many other problems.
For me, that infinitely loving
powerful and knowing God
was hard to reconcile
with all the evils
in the world, especially
the suffering of innocents
like children and animals.
And reincarnation offered a
very obvious solution to that
and allowed me to fully see the
power of that infinitely loving
God, but also with
all the suffering
we see where, by no
fault of their own,
these poor beings are kind of
snuffed out before their time.
And reincarnation is a
great way to see that.
Also important to point out
from the viewpoint of suicide.
Some people think, oh,
well my life is miserable,
I want to get to the
other side, Dr. Alexander
says it's so beautiful.
Well, the problem
is suicide leads
to one of the most profound
life reviews you can imagine,
where you come to realize the
absolute depth of love that
is there for the one
who committed suicide.
And that lesson is
very strong and just is
shock waves throughout the soul
group involved in that suicide.
But it's all to help
move to the next level.
But realize that
it's never the end.
You don't sit up there on a
cloud playing a harp forever.
We come back in and get
it right the next time.
>>NOORY: And again.
>>ALEXANDER: And
again and again.
Exactly.
In that pathway of ascendance.
>>NOORY: Sacred
acoustics, what is that
and how does that get involved
in the scheme of things here?
>>ALEXANDER: Well, about
two years after my coma,
I realized that the only way
to start making sense of this
was to go within, to meditate,
to go into my own consciousness
and try and get a better
idea of the landscape.
Around that time I encountered
the notion of binaural beats
and brain entrainment using
differential sound frequencies.
Now, to me this
is very appealing
because the general
notion as I understood
it is that by putting
slightly different frequencies
into the two ears,
what you end up doing
is kind of hijacking a nucleus
in the lower brain stem.
And I won't go into all the
neuro anatomy and physiology
right now, but it has
to do with driving
the predominant electrical
rhythm in the neocortex,
in the information
processing part of the brain.
And what I've found is that by
using those differential sound
frequencies, you can actually
drive a predominant modulation
of the neocortex.
And in essence, I
could mimic what
had happened with my
near-death experience, where
my neocortex had been destroyed
by E. coli meningitis.
But I could do it temporarily
in a reversible fashion
by basically monotonizing
the electrochemical activity
in the neocortex.
>>NOORY: You
stimulated yourself.
>>ALEXANDER: But to a
point where you're actually
taking the information
processed in the neocortex out
of the loop and allowing
your conscious awareness
to take off.
So these differential sound
frequencies are very powerful.
Binaural beats was a
phenomenon first discovered
in the middle 1800s by
a German physiologist.
People have been using
them in increasing fashion.
And then I ran into Kevin
Kossi and Karen Newell-- Karen
Newell, as I've said,
my spiritual partner
in all this work-- and they were
making their own binaural beats
and doing an extremely
good job of it.
Kevin Kossi is a master at this.
And I encouraged them
to form a company
and to do this, bring
these tools to the world,
which is what they are doing.
And that's why I encourage
people to go there,
try that out.
Go to sacredacoustics.com.
It's extremely powerful.
Now, I can't claim that
we really understand
the mechanisms right now.
It's all very early
in the understanding.
But I've been able to
do something and go back
into my near-death experience
not only to recall memories,
but to actively work with those
beings and guides, deities.
All of that incredible
power of that realm
is something I can access
through these binaural beats
and others can do that, too.
>>NOORY: So let's take a
listen at secret acoustics
and exactly what it means.
[TONE PLAYING]
>>Relax your body,
letting go of any tension.
[TONE PLAYING]
Become aware of your breath
as it moves in and out.
[TONE PLAYING]
>>NOORY: That does have
some kind of a meditation
feel to it, doesn't it?
>>ALEXANDER: Oh, it does.
Yeah.
>>NOORY: It puts you
in a different state.
>>ALEXANDER: It does.
I highly recommend people
listen through headphones,
that has even more power.
But I mean just hearing that
little bit through speakers
to me it just obviously drives
something in my own conscious
whereas you start to
shape your whole mind
and consciousness with this
and it's very, very powerful.
>>NOORY: Eben, it's
always enlightening
to talk with you
about your experience
and I'm glad you're here.
And there's no rush to
get to the other side,
but at least when you do
you've kind of given us
a little hint on what we
can expect, so thank you.
>>ALEXANDER: Well, thank
you so much for having me.
It's always a joy
to be with you, too.
And you're doing a great
job waking this world up.
>>NOORY: Dr. Eben
Alexander, "Map of Heaven,"
"Proof of Heaven,"
literally study guides
on what you can expect when you
cross over to the other side.
And as we've talked about,
there's no rush to get there
but when that day happens,
I think you'll be prepared.
I'm George Noory and thanks
for watching "Beyond Belief."
[THEME MUSIC]